URL: https://www.latimes.com/california/story/2026-02-05/man-videotaped-himself-base-jumping-in-yosemite-federal-officials-say-he-says-it-was-ai
Title: Man videotaped himself BASE jumping in Yosemite, federal officials say. He says it was AI - Los Angeles Times
Time: 2026-02-07T23:23:02.183560
View of Half Dome from Glacier Point inside Yosemite National Park.
(Brian van der Brug / Los Angeles Times)
By
Alex Wigglesworth
Staff Writer
Follow
Feb. 5, 2026
1:42 PM PT
3 min
Click here to listen to this article
Share via
Close extra sharing options
Email
Facebook
X
LinkedIn
Threads
Reddit
WhatsApp
Copy Link URL
Copied!
Print
0:00
0:00
1x
This is read by an automated voice. Please report any issues or inconsistencies
here
.
A California man faces a federal charge for allegedly BASE jumping off Glacier Point in Yosemite National Park during last year’s government shutdown.
An Instagram video and vehicle-tracking data led authorities to Jack Propeck, according to a criminal complaint.
A California man is facing a criminal charge for allegedly BASE jumping off Glacier Point in Yosemite National Park during the federal government shutdown last year.
Jack Propeck, of Mission Viejo, is charged with one count of delivering or retrieving a person or object by parachute, helicopter or other airborne means, according to a complaint filed Dec. 12 in U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of California.
Propeck is representing himself, court documents state. He did not respond to a message seeking comment Thursday.
The investigation began in October, when someone reported to the National Park Service tip line an Instagram video of a man making the jump on Oct. 8, according to a criminal complaint. The video, posted to an account bearing Propeck’s name, pans to the man’s face as he deploys a parachute, it states.
A license plate reader detected Propeck’s car entering the national park on Oct. 7 and leaving Oct. 8, and photos showed Propeck behind the wheel, wearing the same purple mirrored sunglasses the man was seen wearing in the Instagram video, according to the complaint.
When a park ranger contacted Propeck, he denied he was the man in the video, saying he’d used artificial intelligence to superimpose his face onto the footage, the complaint states.
Propeck is next due in court April 7 for arraignment.
World & Nation
A legend of base jumping takes leap of faith -- his last
In 1966, Brian Schubert and a buddy strapped parachutes to their backs and leaped off Yosemite’s 3,000-foot-high El Capitan cliff -- and unwittingly inspired the worldwide extreme sport of base jumping.
Oct. 23, 2006
BASE jumping is an extreme sport in which people make parachute-assisted leaps from fixed objects ranging from cliffs to rooftops to bridges. BASE is an acronym for buildings, antennas, spans and earth.
The activity is
illegal in national parks
, but multiple reports of people engaging in the thrill-seeking activity emerged during the government shutdown that stretched from Oct. 1 to Nov. 12.
At least one other person was charged with allegedly BASE jumping in Yosemite during that time, near El Capitan on Oct. 29, after visitors reported the activity to rangers, park officials said.
The Park Service takes allegations of illegal activity seriously and will investigate and prosecute to the fullest extent of the law, Scott Carr, spokesperson for Yosemite National Park, said in a statement.
“Engaging in such illegal activities endangers both visitors and National Park Service first responders,” Carr said. “Yosemite’s grandeur is a treasure that everyone should experience responsibly.”
More to Read
Chinese citizen allegedly photographed Vandenberg base with drone, says it was ‘probably not a good idea’
Dec. 11, 2024
Man charged with stealing Yosemite Park employee vehicle, which he drove off a cliff during chase
Feb. 18, 2024
BASE jumpers paraglide from the top of graffitied DTLA skyscraper in viral video
Feb. 13, 2024