URL: https://www.fda.gov/news-events/press-announcements/fda-intends-take-action-against-non-fda-approved-glp-1-drugs
Title: FDA Intends to Take Action Against Non-FDA-Approved GLP-1 Drugs | FDA
Time: 2026-02-08T09:07:11.527550
For Immediate Release:
February 06, 2026
Statement From:
Martin A Makary, M.D., M.P.H.
Commissioner of Food and Drugs - Food and Drug Administration
Today, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration is announcing its intent to take decisive steps to restrict GLP-1 active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs) intended for use in non-FDA-approved compounded drugs that are being mass-marketed by companies — including Hims & Hers and other compounding pharmacies — as similar alternatives to FDA-approved drugs. These actions are aimed to safeguard consumers from drugs for which the FDA cannot verify quality, safety, or efficacy.  We take seriously any potential violations of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
The FDA is also taking steps to combat misleading direct-to-consumer advertising and marketing following warning letters that were sent in the fall of 2025. In promotional materials, companies cannot claim that non-FDA-approved compounded products are generic versions or the same as drugs approved by FDA. They also cannot state compounded drugs use the same active ingredient as the FDA-approved drugs or that compounded drugs are clinically proven to produce results for the patient.
The FDA will use all available compliance and enforcement tools within its authorities to address unsubstantiated claims and associated public health concerns. Entities engaged in the manufacture, distribution, or marketing of unapproved compounded GLP-1 products should be aware that failure to adequately address any violations may result in legal action without further notice, including, without limitation, seizure and injunction.
Related Information
Related Information
FDA’s concerns with unapproved GLP-1 drugs used for weight loss
Compounding when drugs are on FDA’s drug shortages list
FDA clarifies policies for compounders as national GLP-1 supply begins to stabilize
Compounding and the FDA: Questions and answers
Understanding the risks of compounded drugs
FDA guidance on Section 503A of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
Media:
FDA Request for Comment
202-690-6343
Consumer:
888-INFO-FDA